---
layout: sip
title: SIP-23 - Literal-based singleton types
vote-status: complete
permalink: /sips/:title.html
redirect_from: /sips/pending/42.type.html
---

**Authors: George Leontiev, Eugene Burmako, Jason Zaugg, Adriaan Moors, Paul Phillips, Oron Port, Miles
Sabin**

**Supervisor and advisor: Adriaan Moors**

## History

| Date           | Version                                                            |
| ---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Jun 27th 2014  | Initial SIP                                                        |
| Jul 15th 2014  | Last update to SIP before declared dormant                         |
| TBD            | Dormant because original authors are not available for its review  |
| Feb 9th 2017   | New author volunteered to update the SIP for review                |
| Nov 16th 2017  | Updated following implementation experience in Typelevel Scala     |
| Aug 7th 2018   | Updated to remove Symbol literals, which won't be supported in 3   |
| Jul 4th 2019   | Drop behaviour spec around asInstanceOf, which is a user assertion |

## Introduction

Singleton types, types which have a unique inhabitant, have been a fundamental component of Scala's
semantics dating back to the earliest published work on its type system. They are ubiquitous in
ordinary Scala code, typically as the types of Scala object definitions understood as modules, where
their role is to give the meaning of paths selecting types and terms from nested values. Selector
paths have an intuitive meaning to programmers from a wide range of backgrounds which belies their
underpinning by a somewhat "advanced" concept in type theory.

Nevertheless, by pairing a type with it's unique inhabitant, singleton types bridge the gap between
types and values, and their presence in Scala has over the years allowed Scala programmers to explore
techniques which would typically only be available in languages, such as Agda or Idris, with support
for full-spectrum dependent types.

Scala's semantics have up until now been richer than its syntax. The only singleton types which are
currently _directly_ expressible are those of the form `p.type` where `p` is a path pointing to a
value of some subtype of `AnyRef`. Internally the Scala compiler also represents singleton types for
individual values of subtypes of `AnyVal`, such as `Int` or values of type `String` which don't
correspond to paths. These types are inferred in some circumstances, notably as the types of `final`
vals. Their primary purpose has been to represent compile time constants (see [6.24 Constant
Expressions](https://scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.12/06-expressions.html#constant-expressions)
and the discussion of "constant value definitions" in [4.1 Value Declarations and
Definitions](https://scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.12/04-basic-declarations-and-definitions.html#value-declarations-and-definitions)).
The types here correspond to _literal_ values (ie. values which programmers can directly write as
terms, see [1.3
Literals](https://scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.12/01-lexical-syntax.html#literals)) such as
`23`, `true` or `"foo"` of the larger non-singleton types they inhabit (`Int`, `Boolean` or `String`
respectively). However, there is no surface syntax to express these types.

As we will see in the motivation section of the proposal below, singleton types corresponding to
literal values (henceforth _literal types_) have many important uses and are already widely used in
many important Scala libraries. The lack of first class syntax for literal types has forced library
authors to use the experimental Scala macro system to provide a means to express them. Whilst this
has proved to be extremely successful, it has poor ergonomics (although this can typically be hidden
from library _users_) and is not portable -- because Scala macros in general and the mechanisms used
to expose literal types to Scala programmes in particular depend on internal implementation details
of the current Scala compiler.

The poor ergonomics of macro-based exposure of literal types was the original motivation for this
SIP. The development of Dotty and other Scala dialects since then has made the portability issue
more urgent.

### Implementation status

Literal types have been implemented in both [Typelevel Scala](https://github.com/typelevel/scala)
and [Dotty](https://dotty.epfl.ch/).

There has been a great deal of useful experience with the Typelevel Scala implementation in
[a variety of projects](https://github.com/search?p=1&q=-Yliteral-types&type=Code) which has
resulted in several improvements which are incorporated in the latest iteration of this document. A
full implementation of this proposal exists as a pull request relative to the 2.13.x branch of the
Lightbend Scala compiler.

## Proposal

### Proposal summary

+ Literals can now appear in type position, designating the corresponding singleton type.
  ```
  val one: 1 = 1                     // val declaration
  def foo(x: 1): Option[1] = Some(x) // param type, type arg
  def bar[T <: 1](t: T): T = t       // type parameter bound
  foo(1: 1)                          // type ascription
  ```

+ The `.type` singleton type forming operator can be applied to values of all subtypes of `Any`.
  To prevent the compiler from widening our return type we assign to a final val.
  ```
  def foo[T](t: T): t.type = t
  final val bar = foo(23)            // result is bar: 23
  ```

+ The presence of an upper bound of `Singleton` on a formal type parameter indicates that
  singleton types should be inferred for type parameters at call sites. To help see this
  we introduce type constructor `Id` to prevent the compiler from widening our return type.
  ```
  type Id[A] = A
  def wide[T](t: T): Id[T] = t
  wide(23)                           // result is 23: Id[Int]
  def narrow[T <: Singleton](t: T): Id[T] = t
  narrow(23)                         // result is 23: Id[23]
  ```

+ Pattern matching against literal types and `isInstanceOf` tests are
  implemented via equality/identity tests of the corresponding values.
  ```
  (1: Any) match {
    case one: 1 => true
    case _ => false
  }                                  // result is true: Boolean
  (1: Any).isInstanceOf[1]           // result is true: Boolean
  ```

+ A `scala.ValueOf[T]` type class and corresponding `scala.Predef.valueOf[T]` operator has been
  added yielding the unique value of types with a single inhabitant.
  ```
  def foo[T](implicit v: ValueOf[T]): T = v.value
  foo[13]                            // result is 13: Int
  ```


### Motivating examples

Many of the examples below use primitives provided by the Scala generic programming library
[shapeless](https://github.com/milessabin/shapeless/). It provides a `Witness` type class and a
family of Scala macro based methods and conversions for working with singleton types and shifting
from the value to the type level and vice versa. One of the goals of this SIP is to enable Scala
programmers to achieve similar results without having to rely on a third party library or fragile
and non-portable macros.

The relevant parts of shapeless are excerpted in [Appendix 1](#appendix-1--shapeless-excerpts).
Given the definitions there, some of forms summarized above can be expressed in current Scala,
```
val wOne = Witness(1)
val one: wOne.T = wOne.value  // wOne.T is the type 1
                              // wOne.value is 1: 1

def foo[T](implicit w: Witness[T]): w.T = w.value
foo[wOne.T]                   // result is 1: 1

"foo" ->> 23      // shapeless record field constructor
                  // result type is FieldType["foo", Int]
```
The syntax is awkward and hiding it from library users is challenging. Nevertheless they enable many
constructs which have proven valuable in practice.

#### shapeless records

shapeless models records as HLists (essentially nested pairs) of record values with their types
tagged with the singleton types of their keys. The library provides user friendly mechanisms for
constructing record _values_, however it is extremely laborious to express the corresponding _types_.
Consider the following record value,
```
val book =
  ("author" ->> "Benjamin Pierce") ::
  ("title"  ->> "Types and Programming Languages") ::
  ("id"     ->>  262162091) ::
  ("price"  ->>  44.11) ::
  HNil
```

Using shapeless and current Scala the following would be required to give `book` an explicit type
annotation,
```
val wAuthor = Witness("author")
val wTitle = Witness("title")
val wId = Witness("id")
val wPrice = Witness("price")
type Book =
  (wAuthor.T ->> String) ::
  (wTitle.T  ->> String) ::
  (wId.T     ->> Int) ::
  (wPrice.T  ->> Double) ::
  HNil

val book: Book =
  ("author" ->> "Benjamin Pierce") ::
  ("title"  ->> "Types and Programming Languages") ::
  ("id"     ->>  262162091) ::
  ("price"  ->>  44.11) ::
  HNil
```
Notice that here the `val` definitions are essential -- they are needed to create the stable path
required for selection of the member types `T`.

Under this proposal we can express the record type directly,
```
type Book =
  ("author" ->> String) ::
  ("title"  ->> String) ::
  ("id"     ->> Int) ::
  ("price"  ->> Double) ::
  HNil

val book: Book =
  ("author" ->> "Benjamin Pierce") ::
  ("title"  ->> "Types and Programming Languages") ::
  ("id"     ->>  262162091) ::
  ("price"  ->>  44.11) ::
  HNil
```

shapeless enables generic programming and type class derivation by providing a mechanism for mapping
a value of a standard Scala algebraic data type onto a sum of products representation type,
essentially nested labelled `Either`'s of the records discussed above. Techniques of this sort are
widely used, and removing the incidental complexity that comes with encoding via macros will improve
the experience for many users across a wide variety of domains.

#### refined and singleton-ops

[refined](https://github.com/fthomas/refined) and
[singleton-ops](https://github.com/fthomas/singleton-ops) are two libraries which build on
shapeless's `Witness` to support refinement types for Scala. A refinement is a type-level predictate
which constrains a set of values relative to some base type, for example, the type of integers
greater thar 5.

refined allows such types to be expressed in Scala using shapeless's `Witness`,
```
val w5 = Witness(5)
val a: Int Refined Greater[w5.T] = 10

// Since every value greater than 5 is also greater than 4,
// `a` can be ascribed the type Int Refined Greater[w4.T]:
val w4 = Witness(4)
val b: Int Refined Greater[w4.T] = a

// An unsound ascription leads to a compile error:
val w6 = Witness(6)
val c: Int Refined Greater[w6.T] = a

//<console>:23: error: type mismatch (invalid inference):
// Greater[Int(5)] does not imply
// Greater[Int(6)]
//       val c: Int Refined Greater[W.`6`.T] = a
                                             ^
```

Under this proposal we can express these refinements much more succinctly,
```
val a: Int Refined Greater[5] = 10

val b: Int Refined Greater[4] = a
```

Type level predicates of this kind have proved to be useful in practice and are supported by modules
of a [number of important libraries](https://github.com/fthomas/refined#external-modules).

Experience with those libraries has led to a desire to compute directly over singleton types, in
effect to lift whole term-level expressions to the type-level which has resulted in the development
of the [singleton-ops](https://github.com/fthomas/singleton-ops) library. singleton-ops is built
with Typelevel Scala which allows it to use literal types as discussed in this SIP.

```
import singleton.ops._

class MyVec[L] {
  def doubleSize = new MyVec[2 * L]
  def nSize[N] = new MyVec[N * L]
  def getLength(implicit length : SafeInt[L]) : Int = length
}
object MyVec {
  implicit def apply[L]
    (implicit check : Require[L > 0]) : MyVec[L] =
       new MyVec[L]()
}
val myVec : MyVec[10] = MyVec[4 + 1].doubleSize
val myBadVec = MyVec[-1] //fails compilation, as required
```

singleton-ops is used by a number of libraries, most notably our next motivating example, Libra.

#### Libra

[Libra](https://github.com/to-ithaca/libra) is a a dimensional analysis library based on shapeless,
spire and singleton-ops. It support SI units at the type level for all numeric types. Like
singleton-ops Libra is built using Typelevel Scala and so is able to use literal types as discussed
in this SIP.

Libra allows numeric computations to be checked for dimensional correctness as follows,
```
import spire.implicits._
// import spire.implicits._

import libra._, libra.si._
// import libra._
// import libra.si._

(3.m + 2.m).show
// res0: String = 5 m [L]

(3.m * 2.m).show
// res1: String = 6 m^2 [L^2]

(1.0.km.to[Metre] + 2.0.m + 3.0.mm.to[Metre]).show
// res2: String = 1002.003 m [L]

(3.0.s.to[Millisecond] / 3.0.ms).show
// res3: String = 1000.0  []

3.m + 2.kg //this should fail
// <console>:22: error: These quantities can't be added!
//        3.m + 2.kg //this should fail
//            ^
```

#### Spire

The Scala numeric library [Spire](https://github.com/non/spire) provides us with another example
where it is useful to be able to use literal types as a constraint.

Spire has an open issue to add a `Residue` type to model modular arithmetic. An implementation might
look something like this,

```
case class Residue[M <: Int](n: Int) extends AnyVal {
  def +(rhs: Residue[M])(implicit m: ValueOf[M]): Residue[M] =
    Residue((this.n + rhs.n) % valueOf[M])
}
```

Given this definition we can work with modular numbers without any danger of mixing numbers with
different moduli,

```
val fiveModTen = Residue[10](5)
val nineModTen = Residue[10](9)

fiveModTen + nineModTen    // OK == Residue[10](4)

val fourModEleven = Residue[11](4)

fiveModTen + fourModEleven
// compiler error: type mismatch;
//   found   : Residue[11]
//   required: Residue[10]
```

Also note that the use of `ValueOf` as an implicit argument of `+` means that the modulus does not
need to be stored along with the `Int` in the `Residue` value which could be beneficial in
applications which work with large datasets.

### Proposal details

+ Literals can now appear in type position, designating the corresponding singleton type. The
  [`SimpleType`](https://scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.12/03-types.html) production is extended
  to include syntactic literals.

  ```
  SimpleType        ::=  SimpleType TypeArgs
                      |  SimpleType ‘#’ id
                      |  StableId
                      |  Path ‘.’ ‘type’
                      |  Literal
                      |  ‘(’ Types ‘)’
  ```

  Examples,
  ```
  val one: 1 = 1                     // val declaration
  def foo(x: 1): Option[1] = Some(x) // param type, type arg
  def bar[T <: 1](t: T): T = t       // type parameter bound
  foo(1: 1)                          // type ascription
  ```

+ The restriction that the singleton type forming operator `.type` can only be appended to
  stable paths designating a value which conforms to `AnyRef` is dropped -- the path may now conform
  to `Any`. Section
  [3.2.1](https://scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.12/03-types.html#singleton-types) of the SLS is
  updated as follows,

  > **Singleton Types**
  >
  > ```ebnf
  > SimpleType  ::=  Path ‘.’ ‘type’
  > ```
  >
  > A **singleton type** is of the form `p.type`. Where `p` is a path pointing to a value which
  > conforms to `scala.AnyRef`, the type denotes the set of values consisting of `null` and the value
  > denoted by `p` (i.e., the value `v` for which `v eq p`). Where the path does not conform to
  > `scala.AnyRef` the type denotes the set consisting of only the value denoted by `p`.

  Example,
  ```
  def foo[T](t: T): t.type = t
  final val bar = foo(23)            // result is bar: 23
  ```

+ The presence of an upper bound of `Singleton` on a formal type parameter indicates that
  singleton types should be inferred for type parameters at call sites.

  This SIP aims to leave the meaning of all currently valid programmes unchanged, which entails that
  it must not alter type inference in currently valid programmes. Current Scala will generally widen
  the types of literal values from their singleton type to their natural non-singleton type when
  they occur in expressions. For example in,

  ```
  val foo = 23
  def id[T](t: T): T = t
  id(23)
  ```

  we expect the inferred type of `foo` and the actual type parameter inferred for `T` in the
  application of `id` to both be `Int` rather than `23`. This behaviour seems to be natural and
  appropriate in circumstances where the programmer is not deliberately working with singleton
  types.

  With the introduction of literal types, however, we do want to be able to infer singleton types in
  cases such as these,

  ```
  case class Show[T](val s: String)
  object Show {
    implicit val showTrue: Show[true] = Show[true]("yes")
    implicit val showFalse: Show[false] = Show[false]("no")
  }

  def show[T](t: T)(implicit st: Show[T]): String = st.s
  show(true)   // currently rejected
  ```

  The proposal in this SIP is that we use an upper bound of `Singleton` on a formal type parameter
  to indicate that a singleton type should be inferred. The above example would then be written
  as,

  ```
  def show[T <: Singleton](t: T)
    (implicit st: Show[T]): String = st.s
  show(true)  // compiles and yields "yes"
  ```

  This change will not affect the meaning of currently valid programmes, because the widened types
  inferred for literal values at call sites do not currently conform to `Singleton`, hence all call
  sites of the form in the above example would currently be rejected as invalid.

  Whilst type inference in Scala is not fully specified, section [6.26.4 Local Type
  Inference](https://scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.12/06-expressions.html#local-type-inference)
  contains language which explicitly excludes the inference of singleton types (see cases 2 and 3,
  "None of the inferred types Ti is a singleton type"). This does not match the current Scala or
  Dotty compiler implementations, where singleton types are inferred where a definition is final,
  specifically non-lazy final val definitions and object definitions. Where a definition has had a
  singleton type inferred for it, singleton types will be inferred from its uses,

  ```
  final val narrow = 23      // inferred type of narrow: 23

  class Widen
  object Narrow extends Wide
  def id[T](t: T): T = t
  id(Narrow)                 // result is Narrow: Narrow.type
  ```

  This SIP updates the specification to match the current implementation and then adds the further
  refinement that an explicit upper bound of `Singleton` indicates that a singleton type should be
  inferred.

  Given,

  > A **singleton-apt** definition is
  > 1. An object definition, or
  > 2. A non-lazy final val definition

  the relevant clauses of 6.26.4 are revised as follows,

  > None of the inferred types Ti is a singleton type unless, (1) Ti is a singleton type
  > corresponding to a singleton-apt definition, or (2) The upper bound Ui of Ti conforms to
  > `Singleton`.

  Example,
  ```
  type Id[A] = A
  def wide[T](t: T): Id[T] = t
  wide(23)                           // result is 23: Id[Int]
  def narrow[T <: Singleton](t: T): Id[T] = t
  narrow(23)                         // result is 23: Id[23]
  ```

  Note that we introduce the type constructor `Id` simply to avoid widening of the return type.

+ A `scala.ValueOf[T]` type class and corresponding `scala.Predef.valueOf[T]` operator has been
  added yielding the unique value of types with a single inhabitant.

  Type inference allows us to infer a singleton type from a literal value. It is natural to want to
  be able to go in the other direction and infer a value from a singleton type.  This latter
  capability was exploited in the motivating `Residue` example given earlier, and is widely relied
  on in current Scala in uses of shapeless's records, and `LabelledGeneric` based type class
  derivation.

  Implicit resolution is Scala's mechanism for inferring values from types and in current Scala
  shapeless provides a macro-based materializer for instances of its `Witness` type class. This SIP
  adds a directly compiler supported type class as a replacement,

  ```
  final class ValueOf[T](val value: T) extends AnyVal
  ```

  Instances are automatically provided for all types with a single inhabitant, which includes
  literal and non-literal singleton types and `Unit`.

  Example,
  ```
  def foo[T](implicit v: ValueOf[T]): T = v.value
  foo[13]                            // result is 13: Int
  ```

  A method `valueOf` is also added to `scala.Predef` analogously to existing operators such as
  `classOf`, `typeOf` etc.

  ```
  def valueOf[T](implicit vt: ValueOf[T]): T = vt.value
  ```

  Example,
  ```
  object Foo
  valueOf[Foo.type]       // result is Foo: Foo.type

  valueOf[23]             // result is 23: Int
  ```

+ Pattern matching against literal types and `isInstanceOf` tests are
  implemented via equality/identity tests of the corresponding values.

  Pattern matching against typed patterns (see [8.1.2 Typed
  Patterns](https://scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.12/08-pattern-matching.html#typed-patterns))
  where the `TypePat` is a literal type is translated as a match against the subsuming non-singleton
  type followed by an equality test with the value corresponding to the literal type.

  Where applied to literal types `isInstanceOf` is translated to a test against
  the subsuming non-singleton type and an equality test with the value corresponding to the literal
  type.

  Examples,
  ```
  (1: Any) match {
    case one: 1 => true
    case _ => false
  }                                  // result is true: Boolean
  (1: Any).isInstanceOf[1]           // result is true: Boolean
  ```

  Importantly, that doesn't include `asInstanceOf` as that is a user assertion to the compiler, with
  the compiler inserting in the generated code just enough code for the underlying runtime to not
  give a `ValidationError`.  The compiler should not, for instance, generate code such that an
  expression like `(1: Any).asInstanceOf[2]` would throw a `ClassCastException`.

+ Default initialization for vars with literal types is forbidden.

  The default initializer for a var is already mandated to be it's natural zero element (`0`,
  `false`, `null` etc.). This is inconsistent with the var being given a non-zero literal type,

  ```
  var bad: 1 = _
  ```
  Whilst we could, in principle, provide an implicit non-default initializer for cases such as these
  it is the view of the authors of this SIP that there is nothing to be gained from enabling this
  construction and that default initializer should be forbidden.


## Follow on work from this SIP

Whilst the authors of this SIP believe that it stands on its own merits, we think that there are two
areas where follow on work is desirable, and one area where another SIP might improve the implementation of SIP-23.

### Infix and prefix types

[SIP-33 Match Infix and Prefix Types to Meet Expression Rules](https://docs.scala-lang.org/sips/priority-based-infix-type-precedence.html)
has emerged from the work on refined types and computation over singleton types mentioned in the
motivation section above.

Once literal types are available it is natural to want to lift entire expressions to the type level
as is done already in libraries such as [singleton-ops](https://github.com/fthomas/singleton-ops).
However, the precedence and associativity of symbolic infix _type constructors_ don't match the
precedence and associativity of symbolic infix _value operators_, and prefix type constructors don't
exist at all. It would be valuable to continue the process of aligning the form of the types and
terms.

### Byte and short literals

`Byte` and `Short` have singleton types, but lack any corresponding syntax either at the type or at the term level. 
These types are important in libraries which deal with low level numerics and protocol implementation
(see eg. [Spire](https://github.com/non/spire) and [Scodec](https://github.com/scodec/scodec)) and
elsewhere, and the ability to, for instance, index a type class by a byte or short literal would be
valuable.

A prototype of this syntax extension existed at an early stage in the development of Typelevel Scala
but never matured. The possibility of useful literal types adds impetus.

### Opaque types

In the reference implementation of SIP-23, the `ValueOf[A]` type is implemented as a value class.
This means that implicit evidence of `ValueOf[A]` will erase to `A` (the value associated with
the singleton types). This is desirable, but due to value class restrictions, ends up boxing
primitive types (such as `Int`).

If we implemented `ValueOf[A]` as an opaque type instead of a value class, then this boxing
would be elided, and the `valueOf[A]` method would be compiled to an identity function.

## Related Scala issues resolved by the literal types implementation

+ [SI-1273](https://github.com/scala/bug/issues/1273) Singleton type has wrong bounds
+ [SI-5103](https://github.com/scala/bug/issues/5103) Singleton types not inferred in all places they should be
+ [SI-8323](https://github.com/scala/bug/issues/8323) Duplicate method name & signature with singleton type parameters over constant types
+ [SI-8564](https://github.com/scala/bug/issues/8564) Methods with ConstantType results get the inhabitant of ConstantType as their body

## Appendix 1 -- shapeless excerpts

Extracts from shapeless relevant to the motivating examples for this SIP,

```
trait Witness {
  type T           // the singleton type represented by this Witness
  val value: T {}  // the unique inhabitant of that type
}

object Witness extends Dynamic {
  type Aux[T0] = Witness { type T = T0 }
  type Lt[Lub] = Witness { type T <: Lub }

  /**
   * Materialize the Witness for singleton type T
   */
  implicit def apply[T]: Witness.Aux[T] = macro ...

  /**
   * Convert a literal value to its Witness
   */
  implicit def apply[T](t: T): Witness.Lt[T] = macro ...
}

object labelled {
  /**
   * The type of fields with keys of singleton type `K` and value type `V`.
   */
  type FieldType[K, +V] = V with KeyTag[K, V]
  trait KeyTag[K, +V]

  /**
   * Yields a result encoding the supplied value with the singleton type `K' as its key.
   */
  def field[K] = new FieldBuilder[K]

  class FieldBuilder[K] {
    def apply[V](v : V): FieldType[K, V] = v.asInstanceOf[FieldType[K, V]]
  }
}

object singleton {
  implicit def mkSingletonOps(t: Any): SingletonOps = macro ...
}

trait SingletonOps {
  import labelled._

  type T

  /**
   * Returns a Witness of the singleton type of this value.
   */
  val witness: Witness.Aux[T]

  /**
   * Narrows this value to its singleton type.
   */
  def narrow: T {} = witness.value

  /**
   * Returns the provided value tagged with the singleton type
   * of this value as its key in a record-like structure.
   */
  def ->>[V](v: V): FieldType[T, V] = field[T](v)
}

```
