---
layout: sip
disqus: true
title: SIP-23 - Literal-based singleton types

vote-status: dormant
vote-text: This proposal is dormant because original authors are not available for its review. There is an implementation <a href="https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/5310">here</a>.
---

**By: George Leontiev, Eugene Burmako, Jason Zaugg, Adriaan Moors, Paul Phillips, Oron Port**

## History

| Date           | Version                                                            |
| ---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Jun 27th 2014  | Initial SIP                                                        |
| Jul 15th 2014  | Last update to SIP before declared dormant                         |
| TBD            | Dormant because original authors are not available for its review  |
| Feb 9th 2017   | New author volunteered to be update the SIP for review             |

### Current status
Literal types were implemented in both Typelevel Scala and Dotty.
New author volunteered to update this SIP, and bring it to an accepted status after committee review.
Require approval to change SIP status from 'dormant' to 'pending'.

<span class="label success">Champion: Adriaan Moors</span>

## Motivation

Singleton types bridge the gap between the value level and the type level and hence allow the exploration in Scala of techniques which would typically only be available in languages with support for full-spectrum dependent types.

Scala's type system can model constants (e.g. `42`, `"foo"`, `classOf[String]`). These are inferred in cases like `object O { final val x = 42 }`. They are used to denote and propagate compile time constants (See [6.24 Constant Expressions](http://www.scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.11/06-expressions.html) and discussion of "constant value definition" in [4.1 Value Declarations and Definitions](http://www.scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.11/04-basic-declarations-and-definitions.html)). However, there is no surface syntax to express such types. This makes people who need them, create macros that would provide workarounds to do just that (e.g. [shapeless](https://github.com/milessabin/shapeless/blob/master/core/src/main/scala/shapeless/singletons.scala)). This can be changed in a relatively simple way, as the whole machinery to enable this is already present in the scala compiler.

Another motivation for adding this functionality is the fact that it is already partially available in scala, but the way it is available makes interaction with this feature a bit inconsistent. Here’s what is possible in the current version of scala:

    scala> val t = "test"
    t: String = test

    scala> val r: t.type = t
    r: t.type = test

But:

    scala> val r: "test".type = "test"
    <console>:1: error: identifier expected but string literal found.
           val r: "test".type = "test"
                  ^

And:

    scala> val r: 42.type = 42
    <console>:1: error: identifier expected but integer literal found.
           val r: 42.type = 42
                  ^

Or even:

    scala> val t = 42
    t: Int = 42

    scala> val r: t.type = t
    <console>:8: error: type mismatch;
     found   : t.type (with underlying type Int)
     required: AnyRef
           val r: t.type = t
                  ^

This looks like an inconsistency, which should be fixed. The proposed change fixes exactly that:

    scala> val r: "test".type = "test"
    r: "test".type = test

    scala> val r: 42.type = 42
    r: 42.type = 42

or even:

    scala> val r: 42 = 42
    r: 42.type = 42

    scala> val t = 42
    t: Int = 42

    scala> val r: t.type = t
    r: t.type = 42

To summarize, scala has full support for literal-based singleton types, but language user has very limited possibilities for creating and using them. Two possible ways currently are asking the compiler to infer the singleton type by marking value as `final`, or use `.type` syntax, which is only available for stable identifiers pointing to values that conform to `AnyRef`.

## Prerequisites

### Any vs AnyRef

Currently there is a possibility to use singleton types in some contexts, but only on identifiers which point to a constant that conforms to `AnyRef`. This restriction is due to `Any` not having an `eq` method, which is what’s used for singleton type-equality check and pattern matching [https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/3558](https://github.com/scala/scala/pull/3558). This has been discussed on the mailing list [here](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/scala-internals/12h2TgDFnDM/Sq-EYi7VD7IJ) and [here](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/scala-internals/jsVlJI4H5OQ/BwdZT5hpKtsJ), and there is a consent that this needs to be done.

### Inhabitants of the type

Getting the inhabitant of a singleton type, as described by [Travis Brown](http://meta.plasm.us/posts/2013/06/28/singleton-types-for-literals-in-scala/), can be done with a macro, which is a part of the [proposed implementation](https://github.com/folone/scala/commit/094883efb4d1c50981cea41f049c3930c8efbc3c).

**Note:** This is one of the many parts of this SIP that are in flux, and are likely to change in the future. We might not need to generate instances of `SingleInhabitant` typeclass, but instead only use `<: Singleton` type bound for this. See [SI-5103](https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-5103). The name is also likely to change to `valueOf[T]`.

## Possible use cases

There are quite a few use cases we’ve collected on the [mailing list](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/scala-language/9VEnFZImyJI). Some of them are as follows.

### Spire

Singleton types will be useful for defining a type like `Residue[13.type]` (Z/13Z, the group of integers modulo 13). We could then mandate that residues can be added only when they are parameterized on the same number. Possibly something like: 

    case class Residue[N <: Int : SingleInhabitant](n: Long) { lhs =>
       def +(rhs: Residue[N]): Residue[N] =
         Residue((lhs.n + rhs.n) % inhabitant[N])
    }

Another use is to help with property based testing. In Spire, there is a Ranged type that makes it easy to ask for numbers in a particular range in ScalaCheck: 

    forAll { x: Ranged[Int, 1, 100] =>
       val n: Int = x.value // guaranteed to be 1 to 100
    }

Currently Spire just builds some of the most common number literals and uses boilerplate to define the end points of `Ranged`. But this is another place where singleton types could really help make things clear. Here’s what `Ranged` could look like:

    class Ranged[From <: Int : SingleInhabitant, To <: Int : SingleInhabitant] {
        def value = {
          val rnd = new scala.util.Random
          val from = inhabitant[From]
          val to = inhabitant[To]
          (from + rnd.nextInt(to - from + 1))
      }
    }

There is also all kinds of length/dimension checking and other standard cases where singleton types will help.

### Scala.js

There is an important use case for literal-based singleton types in Scala.js. In particular for Strings: declaring several overloads of a method that differ only in the actual strings in parameters, for example:

    trait HTMLCanvasElement extends HTMLElement {
      def getContext(contextId: String): Any
      def getContext(contextId: "2d".type): CanvasRenderingContext2D
    }

so that at call-site:

    val anyContext = canvas.getContext("webgl")
    val context2D = canvas.getConttext("2d")

`anyContext` is an `Any` but `context2D` is statically known to be a `CanvasRenderingContext2D`.

Note: The way this currently works:

    scala> :t canvas.getContext("webgl")
    Any

    scala> :t canvas.getContext("2d")
    Any

But

    scala> :t canvas.getContext("2d": "2d".type)
    CanvasRenderingContext2D

### Shapeless

[Shapeless](https://github.com/milessabin/shapeless/) is a project that makes heavy use of singleton types already. It has all the machinery in place to make working with them nicer. Hence, it is a source of inspiration for working on this SIP. This change does not bring much to the table for shapeless though. One of the useful cases would be an ability to explicitly specify types for e.g. records in a more convenient way than possible with the current version of scala:

    val book: "author" ->> String ::
              "title" ->> String ::
              "id" ->> Int ::
              "price" ->> Double :: HNil =
     ("author" ->> "Benjamin Pierce") ::
     ("title"  ->> "Types and Programming Languages") ::
     ("id"     ->>  262162091) ::
     ("price"  ->>  44.11) ::
     HNil

### Others

Quite a few other projects find this feature relevant for more efficient work on the tasks they are solving: Slick, Spark, Scala RX, Scalding, Breeze.

## Proposal

This document proposes to extend an existing very limited syntax for singleton types to a more general one. That is, possibility to use syntax for singleton types, as well as raw literals, in any type position. Here are several examples (taken from the [tests](https://github.com/folone/scala/blob/topic/42.type/test/files/run/42.type.scala)):

### Simple examples:

    type _42 = 42.type
    type Unt = ().type
    type _1 = 1 // .type is optional for literals
    final val x = 1
    type one = x.type // … but mandatory for identifiers

This is not allowed for the reason that we will have problems bootstrapping this

    scala> type _2 = (1+1).type
    <console>:1: error: '.' expected but identifier found.
           type _2 = (1+1).type
                       ^

### Using it with vars:

    scala> var x: 3.type = 3

    scala> x = 42
      <console>:8: error: type mismatch;
       found   : 42.type (with underlying type Int)
       required: 3.type
             x = 42
                 ^

### Pattern-matching

    val y: 5 = 5

    def g(x: Int) = x match {
      case _: y.type => 0
      case _: 7.type => 1
      case _         => 2
    }

### Etc.

    trait Succ[T] {
      type Out
      def apply(x: T): Out
    }

    implicit object One extends Succ[1.type] {
      type Out = 2.type
      def apply(x: 1.type) = 2
    }

    def f[T](x: T)(implicit succ: Succ[T]) = succ(x)

    def main(args: Array[String]): Unit = {
      println(f(1))
      // println(f(5))
      println((g(1), g(5), g(7)))
    }

## Formalization

The proposed change is essentially as follows (adding on the [language reference](http://iainmcgin.github.io/scala-ref-markdown/ScalaReference.html#scala-syntax-summary)):

    SimpleType        ::=  SimpleType TypeArgs
                        |  SimpleType ‘#’ id
                        |  StableId
                        |  Path ‘.’ ‘type’
                        |  Literal [‘.’ type]
                        |  ‘(’ Types ‘)’

A singleton type is of the form `p.type`, where `p` is a path pointing to a value. Or `literal[.type]` (in this case `.type` is optional, because when using a literal we always know if we are in a type- or term-parsing mode). The type denotes set of values consisting of a single value denoted by path `p`, or a `literal`.

## Implementation

The singleton type part (not including `eq` on `Any`) is implemented on [github](https://github.com/folone/scala/tree/topic/42.type). There are currently several outstanding issues that need to be looked into. Namely, `ConstantType` folding and inlining of functions with singleton type result.

The places where those issues might present themselves are marked with `TODO (folone)`, and can be found like this:

    $ ack “TODO \(folone\)” src/

Other places where `ConstantType` is used can be found like this:

    $ grep -r --include="*.scala" "ConstantType" src/

## Some details on the optionality of .type

While discussing this document, the agreement was that we should keep the mandatory `.type` for identifiers, to avoid situations described by Adriaan Moors:

    type T = Int
    final val T = 1
    val x: T = 2 // Which T is this: T, or T.type?

but make it optional for literals, e.g. both `42.type` and `42` in type position are valid.

This change is implemented in the branch, and needs a careful update of all the failed check files (partest can do that automatically: `partest --update-check`).

## Dependencies on other SIPs

This project needs an `eq` method on `Any`.

## Related open tickets

* [https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-8323](https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-8323)
* [https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-8564](https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-8564)
* [https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-7656](https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-7656)
* [https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-5103](https://issues.scala-lang.org/browse/SI-5103)

## Weird behaviour collected so far

### Inlining of functions

    scala> def test: 7.type = {
         |   println("PANDA!")
         |   7
         | }
    test: 7.type

    scala> test
    res0: 7.type = 7

[Suspected culprit](https://github.com/folone/scala/blob/topic/42.type/src/compiler/scala/tools/nsc/transform/Constructors.scala#L643-L644)

Can hopefully be fixed by verifying that the body is pure (by means of SI-7656) before inlining it.

## Useful links

* Implementation: [https://github.com/folone/scala/tree/topic/42.type](https://github.com/folone/scala/tree/topic/42.type)
* Initial announcement: [https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/scala-language/9VEnFZImyJI](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/scala-language/9VEnFZImyJI)
* SIP discussion: [https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/scala-sips/YRHd8WW0V40](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/scala-sips/YRHd8WW0V40)
