---
layout: tutorial
title: Classes

disqus: true

tutorial: scala-tour
categories: tour
num: 4
next-page: traits
previous-page: unified-types
topics: classes
assumed-knowledge: no-return-keyword, type-declaration-syntax, string-interpolation
---

Classes in Scala are blueprints for creating objects. They can contain methods,
values, and variables, which are collectively called _members_.

## Defining a class
A minimal class definition is simply the keyword `class` and
an identifier:
```tut
class MyClass
```
However, a class will often have a primary constructor and a body as well. Here is an example class definition for a point:

```tut
class Point(var x: Int, var y: Int) {

  def move(dx: Int, dy: Int): Unit = {
    x = x + dx
    y = y + dy
  }

  override def toString: String =
    s"($x, $y)"
}
```

This `Point` class has four members: the variables `x` and `y` and the methods `move` and
`toString`. Unlike many other languages, the primary constructor is in the class signature `(var x: Int, var y: Int)`. The `move` method takes two integer arguments but does not return a value (the return type `Unit` corresponds to `void` in Java-like languages). `toString`, on the other hand, does not take any parameters but returns a `String` value. Since `toString` overrides the inherited `toString` method, it is tagged with the `override` keyword.

## Constructors

Constructors can have optional parameters by providing a default value like so:

```tut
class Point(var x: Int = 0, var y: Int = 0)

val origin = new Point()

println(origin) // (0, 0)
```

Optional parameters give you a lot of flexibility but if you still need more flexibility, you can create auxiliary constructors which are procedures (i.e. a `def` with no `=` and no return type).

```tut
class Point {
  def this(x: Int, y: Int) {
    this()
    if (x > 100 || y > 100) println("Warning: Out of bounds")
  }
}
```
There are few requirements for auxiliary constructors:
* They must start with `def this`
* The parameters must _not_ be declared `val` or `var`
* The first statement in the body must call the primary constructor or another auxiliary constructor. In the example above, the implicit primary constructor, `this()`, is called.

## Member scope
Methods are public by default. Use the `private` access modifier
to hide them from outside of the class.
```tut
import scala.math._

class Point(var x: Double, var y: Double) {
  private def distanceFromOrigin = sqrt(x * x + y * y)

  override def toString: String =
    s"Point: ($x, $y), Distance from origin: $distanceFromOrigin"
}
```

You can also simply nest private methods inside of the public ones
that use them:

```tut
import scala.math._

class Point(var x: Double, var y: Double) {

  override def toString: String = {
    def distanceFromOrigin = sqrt(x * x + y * y)

    s"Point: ($x, $y), Distance from origin: $distanceFromOrigin"

  }
}
```

Primary constructor parameters with `val` and `var` are public. However, because `val`s are immutable, you can't write the following.
```
class Point(val x: Int, val y: Int)
val point = new Point(1, 2)
val.x = 3  // <-- does not compile
```

Parameters without `val` or `var` are private values, visible within the class and its subclasses.
```
class Point(x: Int, y: Int)
val point = new Point(1, 2)
val.x  // <-- does not compile
```
